Breethe post version #2 (#281)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: blog/_posts/2019-02-22-elixir-umbrella-mox.md

Who's Mox you ask? 

Mox is cool too... Let's dive in!

<!--break-->

## Breethe

Throughout this post, we will use [Breethe](https://breethe.app) as an example.
Breethe is a Progressive Web App that gives users quick and easy access to air
quality data for locations around the world. Pollution and global warming are getting worse. The first step to understanding and solving these problems is to raise awareness by providing everyone with easy access to accurate data. 

![Video of the Breethe PWA](/images/posts/2018-07-24-from-spa-to-pwa/breethe-video.gif)

The application is [open source](https://github.com/simplabs/breethe-server)
and we encourage everyone interested to look through the source for reference. The server for this application was implemented using an [Elixir](https://elixir-lang.org) umbrella application which will be the focus of this post. The client for Breethe was built with
[Glimmer.js](http://glimmerjs.com), which we discussed in previous posts:
- [From SPA to PWA](/blog/2018/07/24/from-spa-to-pwa.html)
- [Building a PWA with Glimmer.js](/blog/2018/07/03/building-a-pwa-with-glimmer-js.html)

## Umbrella apps and seperating concerns 

> When we first started building Breethe, we asked ourselves a simple question which would dictate the structure of the application and our motivation for using an umbrella app to organise our code. This question was: what if we want to change our air quality provider? It turns out this wasn't just speculation as we are now in the process of doing just that and our decision to use an umbrella app will make the process tremendously easy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we first started building Breethe, we asked ourselves a simple question which would dictate the structure of the application and our motivation for using an umbrella app to organise our code. This question was: what if we want to change our air quality data provider? It turns out this wasn't just speculation as we are now in the process of doing just that and our decision to use an umbrella app will make the process tremendously easy. 
```

> Using an umbrella allowed us to split our server into two very distinct applications, communicating together by way of rigorously defined APIs. The first application functions as the data handling entity of the project - named _breethe_ (see below). It communicates with the air quality provider (a third-party API) to gather the data, then processes and caches it for future use. The second application in the umbrella is the webserver built with Phoenix - named _breethe_web_. It requests the data from the first application, parses it to JSON and delivers the payload to the client in compliance with the [JSON:API specification](https://jsonapi.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using an umbrella allowed us to split our server into two very distinct applications, communicating together by way of rigorously defined APIs. The first application functions as the data handling entity of the project - named _breethe_ (see below). It communicates with the air quality data provider (a third-party API) to gather the data, then processes and caches it for future use. The second application in the umbrella is the web interface built with Phoenix - named _breethe_web_. It requests the data from the first application, serializes it to JSON and delivers the payload to the client in compliance with the [JSON:API specification](https://jsonapi.org/).
```

Here's an overview of the umbrella structure used for Breethe:
```
apps
├── breethe
│   ├── README.md
│   ├── config
│   ├── lib
│   ├── mix.exs
│   ├── priv
│   └── test
└── breethe_web
    ├── README.md
    ├── config
    ├── lib
    ├── mix.exs
    ├── priv
    └── test
```

> We have defined a clear boundary between the business logic and the webserver. This is cool because the umbrella becomes modular like Lego and who doesn't like Lego? Need to change air quality provider? No problem, build a new data application and drop it into the umbrella, replacing the old one. The webserver needn't be changed as long as the new data app implements the API the previous one used. The same could be done if we wanted to change the webserver or if we wanted to extend the functionality of the umbrella. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have defined a clear boundary between the business logic and the webserver. This is cool because the umbrella becomes modular like Lego and who doesn't like Lego? Need to change the air quality data provider? No problem, simply change the data application, leaving the webserver untouched as long as the data app continues to implement the same interface. The same would work the other way round if we wanted to change the webserver.
```

However, for this approach to work well, the APIs used to communicate between the different applications in the umbrella need to be carefully defined. We want to keep the interfaces as little as possible to keep complexity contained. As an example, here are the publicly available functions on the _breethe_ app in the umbrella: 

```elixir
# apps/breethe/lib/breethe.ex
def get_location(location_id), do: # ...

def search_locations(search_term), do: # ...

def search_locations(lat, lon), do: # ...

def search_measurements(location_id), do: # ...
```

> Equally, these are the only functions the Phoenix webserver (or any other app in the umbrella) can call on the _breethe_ app. These principles are of course not only applicable at the top level of the application but also within its internal logical contexts. For example, within the _breethe_ app, we have isolated the functions explicitly making requests to third-party APIs and abstracted them away behind an interface. This, again, reduces complexity and facilitates testing as we can isolate the different components of the business logic. This philosophy lends itself very well to being tested using Mox. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Equally, these are the only functions the Phoenix web app (or any other app in the umbrella) can call on the _breethe_ app. These principles are of course not only applicable at the top level of the application but also within its internal logical contexts. For example, within the _breethe_ app, we have isolated the functions explicitly making requests to third-party APIs and abstracted them away behind an interface. This, again, reduces complexity and facilitates testing as we can isolate the different components of the business logic. This philosophy lends itself very well to being tested using Mox. 
```

## Testing domains independently using Mox

[Mox](https://github.com/plataformatec/mox), as the name suggests, is a library that defines mocks bound to specific behaviors. A behavior is a set of function signatures that must be implemented by a module. Consequently, Mox guarantees the mocks for a module be consistent with the original functions they replace during testing. This rigidity makes the tests more maintainable and requires that the behaviors for each module be meticulously defined; precisely the qualities desired when implementing the APIs within our umbrella. 

> For example, let's consider mocking the public API for the _breethe_ application when testing _breethe_web_. As the bridge between the two is only composed of the four functions shown in the previous section, mocking the _breethe_ application's public interface when testing the webserver only requires mocking those four functions. Naturally, this is only reasonable if we seperately test the _breethe_ application in full, from interface to database. Crucially, it is the singularity of the interface (four functions) which allows this degree of separation between the two applications in the umbrella both in testing and in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's consider mocking the public API for the _breethe_ application when testing _breethe_web_. As the bridge between the two is only composed of the four functions shown in the previous section, mocking the _breethe_ application's public interface when testing the webserver only requires mocking those four functions. Naturally, this is only reasonable if we seperately test the _breethe_ application in full, from interface to database. Crucially, it is the singularity of the interface which allows this degree of separation between the two applications in the umbrella both in testing and in production.
```

The fact that it's four functions is mentioned a few times ;)

Let's take a look at the controller action for a location search by id:

```elixir
# apps/breethe_web/lib/breethe_web/controllers/location_controller.ex
@source Application.get_env(:breethe_web, :source)

def show(conn, %{"id" => id}) do
  location =
    id
    |> String.to_integer()
    |> @source.get_location()

  render(conn, "show.json-api", data: location, opts: [])
end
```

The interesting part is in the call to the _breethe_ application:

```elixir 
|> @source.get_location()
```

> The reason we're using the `@source` module attribute is to switch between the mock and the real function defined on the _breethe_ application; this is defined in the config files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason we're using the `@source` module attribute is to be able to switch between the mock and the real function defined on the _breethe_ application; this is defined in the config files:
```

```elixir
location = insert(:location, measurements: [])
```
2. It defines a mock in the `Breethe.Mock` module for the `get_location(location_id)` function defined in the _breethe_ application's API and sets the return value to the location we created at 1. The mock is passed as an argument to the `expect` clause which verifies the mock is executed during the test (instead of the real function). <br/><br/>
```elixir
Breethe.Mock
|> expect(:get_location, fn _location_id -> location end)
```
As long as we’ve established the callback in the behavior implemented by the Breethe module, we don’t need to explicitly define the Breethe.Mock module (Mox creates it). Here's the callback for this particular function (for reference, it isn't coded in the test).
```elixir
# apps/breethe/lib/breethe.ex
defmodule Behaviour do
  @callback get_location(location_id :: integer) :: %Breethe.Data.Location{}
end
```
3. It builds a connection and makes a call to the webserver's route designed to handle a location search by id. <br/><br/>
```elixir
conn = get(build_conn(), "api/locations/#{location.id}", [])
```

> 4. It tests the JSON response is correct (abridged for brevity). <br/><br/>

Reviewer: I'd maybe add that this asserts on the attributes of the location created in 1. and returned from the mock in 2.

```elixir
assert json_response(conn, 200) == %{
          "data" => %{
            ...
          }
        }
```

> Using mocks greatly simplifies the testing process. Each test can be smaller and more specific. Each test is faster as we are no longer making calls to other parts of the umbrella; we are only running the anonymous functions that define the mocks. For instance, the mock in our example above only executes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using mocks greatly simplifies the testing process. Each test can be smaller and more specific. Each test is faster as we are not making calls to the database or external systems; we are only running the anonymous functions that define the mocks. For instance, the mock in our example above only executes:
```
